Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger. In this video,
let's talk a little bit about definitions,
specifications, and the interpretation
of definitions. To illustrate the ideas,
let's go back to our basic concepts of
geometry. So, recall that we defined a point
𝐴
A to
be a pair of numbers, actually
rational numbers. We defined a line
𝐿
L to be a proportion
𝑎
:
𝑏
𝑐
a:b:c of rational numbers
with a certain condition on
𝑎
a and
𝑏
b not being both 0. We defined a triangle
𝐴
ˉ
A
​
ˉ
A
​
to be a set of three points that
are not collinear. We defined a
circle in terms of this proportion
involving six numbers: the proportion
(
𝑥
+
𝑦
−
𝑎
𝑥
−
𝑏
𝑦
+
𝑐
=
)
(x
+y
−2ax−2by+c=0).
These are also part of the
definitions. We say that the point
𝐴
A lies on the line
𝐿
L. This point lies on the line
L precisely when
𝑎
𝑥
+
𝑏
𝑦
+
𝑐
=
ax+by+c=0, and the point
𝐴
A lies on the circle
𝐶
C precisely when
𝑥
+
𝑦
−
𝑎
𝑥
−
𝑏
𝑦
+
𝑐
=
x
+y
−2ax−2by+c=0. So, we made these definitions, and
they're quite different from the usual definitions
that one finds in geometry texts. We did not
define a line as an infinite set of points. We did
not define a circle as an infinite set of points.
So, a useful guiding idea is that mathematical
definitions should be concise, clear, and
close to specifications. I mean the information
required to determine a particular mathematical
object. To illustrate that, let's look at
a triangle. Alright, so here's a triangle,
and let's think about the question of
how to define what a triangle is. This
is a question that's finessed in almost
all geometry books, rather amazingly,
even though a triangle is an absolutely
fundamental mathematical object. Somehow
people think it's not necessary to define what it
is exactly. Well, I think it is very important to
define exactly what it is. And for me, a triangle
is a set of three points that are not collinear.
But there are also other possibilities. You
could also define a triangle as a set of three
line segments. The line segments have the property
that they're meeting at the corners. Or you could
define a triangle in terms of three lines
𝐿
,
L
​
,L
. Or you could define a triangle in terms
of the area or the region bounded by it. So,
you can think of this actual
region as being the triangle. Now,
I'm not saying that these are wrong. These
are all legitimate variants on possibilities.
But there's something a little bit more
efficient about this one than these three.
Suppose, for example, that we have a particular
triangle in mind that we want to send the
information to specify that particular
triangle to our friend on the Internet. So,
we can't draw a picture; we just want to send
some amount of data. With this description,
we need to send the coordinates
of this point, this point,
and this point—two pieces of data each will
specify this triangle. With this approach,
we need to specify the three line segments. To
specify a line segment requires two endpoints. So,
we have two coordinates per endpoint, but each one
of these endpoints is itself a point, so we have
six times two: twelve pieces of information
to specify the triangle via line segments.
Via lines, well, if we think
of a line as being a triple
(
𝑎
,
𝑏
𝑐
)
(a,b,c), then we have three per line:
nine pieces of information required there. And
there's also a little bit of ambiguity because
lines are only defined up to scalars. And I think
we want to define this. Well, it's not so clear
how you're going to define that as a region
or how you're going to express that region by
doing one of these three things and talking about
the region inside, given a situation like this.
So, my point here is that if you have to define
a new mathematical object—let's say you've just
discovered a squiggle, and this is a new idea
that you want to introduce to mathematics,
and you have an intuitive idea of what a squiggle
is—but you would like to make a clear mathematical
definition. So, my suggestion to you is to ask
yourself the following question: Suppose I have
a particular squiggle, whatever it is, and I
want to convey that information to somebody
else via the Internet. What is the minimal
amount of information that I have to compose
to be able to completely specify the squiggle?
You have to think about the most efficient way
of encoding that information and then try to make
your definition as close to that specification as
possible. When specifications and definitions are
close together, then you have a pleasant theory.
Now, let's talk a little bit about the
interpretation of mathematical definitions. So,
mathematical definitions can be visualized
or interpreted or modeled in different ways.
This is an interesting idea with a lot of
ramifications. So, let me try to explain
it through a very simple example. When we
defined a point originally, we were thinking,
and I drew a picture of a plane and a dot, and
I said, "That's the point," and we're going to
describe or define what that point is. And
we decided on an ordered pair to denote the
𝑥
x and the
𝑦
y coordinates
used to specify that point. That was
our definition of a point, and that
was our visualization. It represents
a dot in this two-dimensional plane.
But some people might object to this definition.
The definition of an ordered pair without a
diagram seems to be completely divorced from
the geometry. You can't necessarily tell what
the geometry is. That's actually a good thing
because it gives us flexibility in interpreting
what our mathematics is really about. It turns out
that there's more than one way often of modeling
or interpreting a given mathematical expression
or formula or result. So, to give you an example
of some alternatives, here's a different
picture that also models the idea of a point.
So, now I've taken this
𝑥
x-
𝑦
y plane and I've slanted it so that it's in
this horizontal plane, which you should think of
as being essentially horizontal here. And we now
have a third dimension or third axis, the
𝑧
z-axis, running perpendicular from the page.
Our original point, that red one, is now lying
in this horizontal plane. Now, I might imagine
a vertical line that goes through this point,
which is parallel to the
𝑧
z-axis, so it's actually coming out of
the plane. And now we say, "Oh, we could
interpret the point (3, 2) as not representing
that point but actually representing that line."
So, imagine a three-dimensional creature
that had no two-dimensional visual ability
and that could only feel things.
Okay, they could feel things. So,
a creature like this might have trouble feeling
a dot on a plane but would be very comfortable
feeling a line in three-dimensional
space. These are obvious correspondences
between points in the plane and lines in
three-dimensional space which are all vertical.
Here's a third example for the same thing.
We still have a plane now lying horizontally.
There is our original point. But now what
I'm doing is I'm fixing a point on the
𝑧
z-axis, some fixed
black dot. And what I'm doing is I'm connecting
points on the plane with this fixed black dot to
make lines which are all going through that
point. Now, I can interpret this point (3,
2) as not representing this dot, not
representing the vertical line through it,
but rather representing this slanted
line through the point and our fixed dot.
In this picture, theorems of geometry become
theorems about these lines through this fixed
point. Any theorem in Euclidean geometry that you
can frame, you can reformulate in terms of the
picture about lines that have this particular
property. And it might be that on some other
planet, this is a preferred way of thinking
about things. So, we're not going to say that
one of these is better than the other. We can use
whichever one is convenient to us. The definition
rides above all interpretations of it and
gives us a flexibility that can be very useful.
Next time, we are going to talk about
some other aspects of elementary geometry.
We're going to look at definitions of
quadrilaterals and polygons. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening.